the following content is provided under
a Creative Commons license your support
will help MIT open courseware continue
to offer highquality educational
resources for free to make a donation or
view additional materials from hundreds
of MIT courses visit mitop courseware at
ocw.mit.edu all right good morning
everyone welcome back from spring break
hope you had a nice time off and
couldn't wait to get back to
6046 so exciting second half uh going to
do uh flow networks uh today on Thursday
uh next week it's linear programming uh
on to complexity distributed algorithms
cryptography I topic is going to come
fast and furious hopefully they'll all
be interesting so there's a lot of setup
associated with the network flow Max
flow uh it's an optimization problem and
so I'm going to spend like the the first
hour here and hopefully it won't be too
too boring uh setting up flow networks
describing the max flow problem as you
can see this outline is uh fairly
involved talking about Cuts in a network
uh residual networks and uh we'll uh
more or less U end the lecture with uh
the statement uh though not the proof
we'll save that for next time of the max
flow mincut theorem which is really an
iconic theorem uh in the literature and
certainly uh The crucial theorem for U
flow networks and uh
we'll take the max flow mcot theorem and
use that to get to the first ever uh Max
flow algorithm which was due to Ford and
Fulkerson and uh that should be pretty
much at the end of this end of today's
lecture and next time we'll talk about
uh the proof of Max flow Min cut talk
about some of the issues with Ford
Fulkerson and then use
maxlow as uh as a hammer to solve
interesting problems in bipartite
matching a baseball playoff elimination
and things like that so just like
shortest Pats uh can be used not just to
compute uh uh the shortest distance from
point A to point B you could imagine
that other problems for example
scheduling problems time problems could
be solved using dyra youve probably seen
examples of that Max flow is another
algorithmic Hammer that's been used to
solve a wide variety of problems we
won't really touch upon that aspect
today but we'll spend a bunch of time on
Thursday uh talking about that so let's
get
started we're going to start with
defining what a flow network
is and at some level it's really simple
I mean it's a it's a
graph a graph is going to going to have
vertices and edges we're going to um
only look at directed graphs and we're
going to have a a couple of constraints
associated with these directed graphs
that are going to make the algorithms
and the proofs and the notation a lot
simpler I'll get to that in a few
minutes and uh the key thing with the
flow networks I mean just like you have
a source and a destination for shortest
paths in a flow networks as well you're
going to have a source and you're going
to have a sync right so we going to have
distinguished
vertices two distinguished
vertices we're going to call them um The
Source
s and a sync
T and so the basic idea here and just to
sort of set things up right up front is
that there's going to be some flow
coming out of s and it's going to have
to obey some constraints associated with
capacities of the edges in order to make
its way to te and along the way um this
is flow this is water you can think of
it as water or cars or what have you
it's a rate you're you're not going to
allow accumulation in the intermediate
nodes so you're going to
have um Law of Conservation associated
with this commodity that's flowing you
know be it water or cars or people and
uh that essentially comes down to um for
any uh vertex other than S or T
everything entering the vertex has to
leave the vertex right so that's like
Kirk off's current law for example so
there's a lot of analogies here with
respect to real life or electricity in
this case and uh you'll see that I think
um uh over and over as we go
along so let's uh uh take a look at our
flow Network I'm not going to draw it
out here I'm going to keep this one
example all through the lecture but just
to go off talk about uh edges and
capacities before we actually draw an
example um we're going to have edges
directed edges u v so you have an edge
from U to V and it's going to
belong uh to to e obviously that's the
reason um the EDG is in the network and
this Edge is is going to have a non-
negative each Edge is going to have a
non- negative capacity
um
CUV right and I if per chance there's no
Edge from let's say uh S1 to S2 these
are different vertices from The Source
or uh or the sync uh just as an example
or you can say it's between A and B then
we're can to assume that the capacity is
is zero so
if UV does not belong to E
then assume that
CUV is zero so there's no way of getting
from U to V this this rate this water
cars you know there's no road that gets
you from U to V okay so let's draw an
example of a flow Network we'll talk a
little bit about uh what the flow is and
what the max flow is uh in in you know
sort of example driven uh algorithm
design if you
will so I got a source and I got uh a SN
T that's and then I got a bunch of nodes
in the
middle just draw them
out I'm not going to bother naming those
nodes no that might be a
mistake we'll
see so this is not like it's an a cyclic
graph
you allowed
Cycles in this graph but we will have a
couple of constraints that are
associated with this graph that I'll get
to in just a minute so first uh that's
what all we got you got gve directed
graph can have Cycles in it and I'm
going to draw a a a couple of numbers
here the numbers I'm putting up here are
the capacities
associated with each of these edges
right
so um those are just the capacities
those are CUV and I said that if u v
does not belong to e then you're going
to assume that CUV is zero so uh there's
no Edge for
example between uh this node and that
node so there's no way that you can
directly get from here to there
uh you can go like this like this and
like that uh and get from here to there
and you can obviously go like so and
like this and like that uh to get the
from the uh the one on the top left to
the one on the bottom right okay so uh
that's essentially the setup uh except
for the fact that we've just talked
about capacities and uh this is sort of
the stand withd if you will this is the
amount of traffic that can go through
this road and now we have to talk about
the specific case where we're actually
going to shove things through the
network right so we're going to have
another number so typically we're going
to have two numbers associated with each
Edge one of them is going to be the
capacity and the other one is going to
be the flow that goes through the edge
and as you can imagine we're going to
have this uh constraint that says that
the flow can never exceed the capacity
and that's a local constraint straint
associated with each Edge okay that
doesn't mean that U uh there aren't you
know variations possible with respect to
uh the overall flow of the network uh
things can change you oby The Edge
capacities and uh there could be
different flow coming out of s and going
into T Etc and so there was going to be
an optimization here associated with the
exact numbers that all obey these Edge
con straints these Edge capacity
constraints okay so uh let's take a a
real simple example of uh of flow in
this network and ah I have some colored
shock
here so I can put
down the flow over here and so this is
flow wow that is an ugly
color but now we stuck for the rest of
this
lecture so I got two
two um one colon three so the first
number is the flow and the second number
is the capacity let me just write that
out this
is so and and then this is one colon 3
this is uh one colon one so that that
meets the capacity this is two colum 3
and then
one three two col 3 and one COL two
right so that's uh my
first example of a flow and that we want
to we want to make sure that uh this
flow makes sense okay and we're going to
write this down a little more precisely
in just a minute but I I've sort of
given you the intuition already right
I've talked about it's okay okay to have
flow from the source it's it's h it's
it's the it's the mountain you know
spewing water or or or that's the source
of the river and and this is the sea for
example and the and and the river flows
into it but along the way um you uh you
really can't have
accumulation okay uh not in because when
you think about it as as a rate and so
this is sort of gallons per second uh
then uh maybe you'll have a little bit
of accumulation allowed but uh over a
huge period of time you know you can't
have infinite accumulation so so that's
where the conservation lock kicks in
which says anything that goes into a
node that is not marked s or t has to
leave the node so you look at this and
you go well there's two things coming in
here there's one and one which add up to
adds up to two and there's two leaving
so we're good there okay uh and then I
pick another one uh this this one for
example uh you got two coming in and you
got one and one leaving we're good there
right for T you got three coming in uh
2+ one and uh another check to do is uh
well you got two coming out of the
source right so hopefully that all makes
sense and ask questions if you're
confused um one other thing to look at
which is interesting is that you could
have flows that are essentially uh
cyclic you could have um Commodities
that are flowing in a little cycle and
can you see that can anyone see that
over
here
yep go
ahead bottom right
triang bottom right triangle this thing
over here like that good right so you
see this one going up this way this way
and that way and so there's nothing
that's stopping us
uh from um taking
this and um I had one over here so I'm
going to make that zero I I had two over
here and I'm going to make that one and
I had two over here and I'm going to
make that
one
uh oh what was it it was one
before oh you're right it was one before
so I should make that zero then
good I wanted to subtract one from what
I had before right and I and and I
screwed that one up the simple thing all
right wow uh no wonder I didn't major in
mathematics Okay computer science is
this forgiving
field um so you can go zero uh uh well
this is zero so so now let's take a look
at what we have here and uh uh check
that nothing went wrong right we want to
check that nothing went wrong and so two
coming in uh one going out one going out
and nothing coming in here so we're all
good and so on and so forth okay so um
there's interesting things happening
here with respect to uh uh the
conservation laws and uh having to obey
them uh in general you can imagine that
what we're interested in is
simply maximizing the flow from the
source and getting as much flow out of
the source as possible and pushing it
into the snc okay now the flow here into
T as you can see is 2 + 1 which is three
okay uh can
anyone take this particular flow Network
and uh increase the flow I mean it's
easy to decrease the flow you can make
everything zero and that would be valid
right but can you can you increase the
flow you think that this flow Network
allows for a larger flow than three
given that the capacities of those edges
are fixed and I'm not going to change
them let's
see I think all of you have frisbees
right yeah some yeah back there I don't
think you can because you're Maxim
edges
toot on the very
top uh people agree with that over there
yeah okay so that made perfect
sense to me
it did uh um so I the one of the crucial
observations that were just made here
and let me just focus in on that is and
that's why I think uh the other
gentleman said no is that you can
actually decrease the flow in particular
edges and that's going to help you
increase the overall flow right and
that's why this problem is challenging
that's why we need so much of a setup
all right so one thing that I could do
is um I could essentially say you know
I'm going to take this and make this uh
make this zero right so when I do that
um essentially what I have is I I get to
uh I get to push more flow out from here
right so I get to push more flow this
two I can turn this into a two and I can
turn this into a two right am I am I
done not quite I mean I got one little
bug here but I can fix that right right
I got one little bug here which says I
got two coming out here I made this zero
so I have to push something more but hey
I'm lucky I got s here which is giving
me as much as I want correct so I can
just make this a
two right and so now we get a flow of of
four right uh you both get frisbees
should we do blue and
purple here you go could you stand
up oh okay over there
so that actually kind of summarizes at
some level our task ahead right so we
have to find ways of increasing the flow
and sometimes we have to take a step
backwards in the sense that we decrease
the flow on a particular Edge right so
it's not this monotonic increase that
dyra would do or a greedy algorithm like
MST that Eric talked about about there's
there's going to be something a little
more interesting here uh we uh
eventually are going to end up doing
things uh uh in in a monotonic way uh in
terms of the overall flow so the max
flow that we're trying to get at is
going to start with the current flow and
we're going to improve the current flow
constantly but that doesn't mean that
the uh edges are going to look monotonic
in terms of uh the flows on a particular
Edge in relation to the capacity you'll
never exceeded the capacity but as you
saw in this little example already we
increase from 3 to four by taking that
edge that was vertical up there which
says zero uh colon 3 and that was one
and we we shrank the the flow on it
right so how are we going to discover
these paths right especially if you have
a 5,000 node Network and uh I don't know
10,000 edges right so that's essentially
what we have to do for uh the rest of
this lecture right any questions so far
okay so uh we've done flow networks I
kind of defined what the max flow
problem is um and let me just write that
out I more more
precisely I
given a flow
Network
G find the flow
with maximum
value on
G and for that the max
flow is four right so that's other thing
we haven't actually done which is
obviously important for us to do which
is we have to show that the four uh in
this case is the max flow right so now
of course I given that away and so I'm
not going to ask you can you push this
over to five and but you might think
that five is a possibility simply
because the capacities of the edges that
are coming out of the source are 3+ 2
which is five right so it's certainly
possible that uh uh that you could push
at least if you only look at those two
edges that you could push five units
from The Source but in this case in this
example um if you obey the laws of
conservation you
cannot obey those laws and get five
units from the source to the sync T
right but we have to prove that I we
have have an algorithm that says this is
the best that you can possibly do and
the algorithm terminates when that
happens right and that's our Ford Fon
algorithm
right good um so that's uh what we have
so far um I want to talk about flow
Network assumptions and I can do that
over here
and this is going to make our life
easier one of the things that's a little
bit U confusing sometimes is the
circular flow and the fact that U we're
going to potentially have uh uh flows
that uh correspond
to edges coming in and edges going out
so for example if I had something like u
s and U for example and S could be the
could be the source in this case or it
could be another node uh suppose I had a
little subn Network that looks like this
where I'm just giving you what the
capacities are um this is a a a bit
strange in the sense that you could have
a situation where you uh essentially
have zero flow really because you have
one unit coming in here and one unit
leaving all right and you can think of
this let's just call this S1 if if to to
make it clear that it doesn't have to be
the The Source right and so you could
have the circularity that you saw over
there and now you're talking about well
I mean I have I might have one colon one
here and one colon two here which is
fine for this sub network but if I have
stuff going out uh what happens uh what
happens with that well that's got to be
a zero um I could have one and a two uh
and uh if I have a if I have a two here
uh then well if I had a one and a two
here then that doesn't work uh because
uh maybe I need I need uh something else
coming in so you can see that pretty
quickly it gets kind of confusing if you
end up having these U cycles that are uh
that that are uh such simple Cycles
especially the ones where you have Su
and us okay
and so we're going to disallow cycles of
two kinds right the first cycle we're
going to disallow is this simple one
where we say if I have a then no self
Loop edges
allowed
okay right so that would involve
accumulation at a particular node and
it's going to make things really
confusing and clrs disallows that and
most flow Network algorithms assume that
you're just going to discard these
Cycles um this particular
transformation uh that I'm going to
describe here um is something that U is
going to be forced on you and this for
you for your benefit uh in in in over6
in in lectures and sections uh but uh
it's not actually uh something that clrs
follows and uh it's going to make things
simpler though and uh what we're going
to do is we're going to take uh uh any
pair of vertices that has this
characteristic where you have S1 U and U
S1 and they have nonzero capacities
right so S1 U has a capacity of one uh
usu1 has a capacity of two both of these
edges exist and if these edges exist
that means they have nonzero capacity
right positive capacity and we're going
to transform that uh very simply uh into
uh this this is not changing the the
generality of the algorithm but all I'm
going to do is transform it call this S1
in into something that
satisfies this
restriction
so I could have two here one and one
okay so all I've done is introduce U
Prime right and I can always do this if
this is trivial for any pair of vertices
I can introduce one other vertex it all
works out linear expansion constant
factors ignore them life is wonderful
right so I all I've done is uh taken
away the situation where I have you can
think of it as um uh as two-way streets
right two-way streets are annoying uh
you don't quite know what the rate of
traffic is from one end of the street to
another because cars are going in both
directions and you have to do
subtraction right subtraction is painful
so we we we don't want that right so uh
so we're just going to say we're just
going to assume that there's this U
Prime and and now you're all set right
this we allow this so we have to allow
for generality reasons as we saw in that
very first example there we are going to
have Cycles here okay but we just don't
want Cycles to be of uh length one or
two okay so those that's essentially
what we're going to dis allow all right
um the good news is that uh if you do
this then we'll only have a single
notion of flow whereas if you go read
clrs you'll see that there's two Notions
of flow and clrs there's positive flow
which is different from net
flow and positive flow is different from
net flow in graphs that have this
particular structure or have nodes with
these properties but if you you disallow
them then you can just talk about flow
and it doesn't matter it's positive flow
is the same as net flow all right so for
the purposes of uh 6046 for this
semester uh we're going to Simply think
about flow and equate that to positive
flow equate that to net flow and it's
all going to work out assuming your
graphs satisfy these two properties of
the cycle lens all
right
cool good so let's uh keep going here so
we're up to uh finished up on Max flow
uh let me just uh give you some sense of
uh
notation uh I've talked a
lot or about uh
constraints but we got to write some
stuff about because we're going to be
uh getting more precise and proving
things in just a few
minutes so what is a flow well to be
precise it is going to be a function
that satisfies the following properties
satisfies the capacity constraint
this is
the obvious capacity
constraint intuitive capacity constraint
and then we got flow
conservation and the important thing
here is that I I don't have it for
all V but I do have uh it for all
vertices V that are not the source or
the sync and I'm going to
require fuv equals zero right
and the last one which I haven't talked
about but
becomes easy to talk about given this
constraint is Q symmetry
right so uh you if you take uh there
doesn't have to be an edge between u and
v now I'm talking about the flow f
between u and v and so U could be S
which is the source V could be T which
is the sync so in general I'm not
talking about a flow and that there
obviously has to be a a a path uh from U
to V in order for there to be a nonzero
flow f UV right if there's no path
there's no way of getting there but
having said that uh the definition of a
flow here in our network is the
straightforward definition which simply
says if there's a a flow from U to V
regardless of what u and v are then the
value of that flow is simply the
negation
of the value of the flow from a Vu right
so which makes perfect sense right so um
and and this all works out uh under the
definition of U of net flow and so this
is essentially what the definition of
net flow is on in in the textbook but
for our purposes here we don't have to
add that adjective we just are going to
be talking about flows positive or net
they're the same all
right all right good
so one of the things you can do uh with
this notation and we're going to um use
what's called implicit summation
notation on top of this is to U prove
some interesting things interesting
theorems that give you some intuition as
to how algorithms on Flow networks are
going to work and um
in
particular uh we're going
to use this notation when we talk about
the value of a
flow so the value of a flow f is
denoted you can think of it as a
cardinality of f
and f is
V belonging to capital V FS
V and that is FS comma V right so what I
have written here
well um given a flow Network I want one
particular quantity that I want to
maximize right and that particular
quantity is going to be defined based on
how much I can push from s how much can
I push outward from s right that's The
crucial quantity that I want to maximize
um that quantity uh is you think about
everything that is going out of s and
you add it all up together right so you
uh you look at um uh from s you look at
any other vertex uh every other vertex
and you say what is FS comma V right and
I'm not talking about just the edges
that come out of s uh this vertex uh V
small V can be any vertex right if I add
up all of the flows that come out of uh
come out of s then that is the the the
flow that is uh that corresponds to my
flow Network that is everything that's
getting pushed out of pushed out of s
okay um now it may be the case that uh
remember I'm talking about flow here so
it it it may be the case that you have
it you you have an edge uh from uh s
coming in
from
V4 okay and they may
be there may be a a
flow associated with that this may be
something like one colon 2 all right so
uh what this means is that uh
f
sv4
is this is f remember so this is minus F
V4 s and in this particular case um it's
uh this is is
one so this is minus
one
okay so so keep that in
mind I when I talk about the flow of the
network I'm going to be looking at the
source and I'm going to be looking at
all of the flows that are going outward
and I have to keep in mind the skew
symmetry relationship I obviously have
to obey capacity constraints and uh the
conservation laws all
right so given that
uh let's uh use this uh implicit
summation
notation and uh show some simple
properties of
flow right so let's uh look at
one thing I want to
emphasize is uh what I've done here is
used
this implicit summation
notation which simply says if I see a a
capital letter here that's a set and I'm
going to have
to enumerate all of the members of that
set and uh the its implicit summation so
as I enumerate those members I'm going
to add up all of these quantities right
so that's really what this means so this
Sigma here gets uh embedded into this
capital V so two things going on the
small V turned into capital V because
I'm looking at the entire set and the
sigma gets in there too and that's why
it's implicit summation not just
implicit set
notation all right so some simple
properties I can say f x comma X is zero
where uh X is an arbitrary Set uh all
that says is let's say x has uh a a
single uh member in it uh which is a
then F of a a is is always zero uh
because we don't allow self- Loop edges
and U uh that's pretty much all you need
uh if you have a pair of vertices here A
and B then what you're saying is f of a
plus F of
ba is uh is zero and that's true because
of skew symmetry right we just wrote
that out so f of x x is zero um and in
general you can say even though X and Y
are are sets of vertices I'm going to be
able to use Q symmetry to um to say that
f of x comma Y is minus of f of Y comma
X all right uh similar
argument and then
lastly there's any number of these uh we
just do three of them here x
of f of x Union
y to Z is f of x
Z Plus F of YZ we're going to use these
properties to prove our first theorem
here on Flow networks if x of X
intersection Y is null so you don't want
to double count so that's all this is H
make sure you're not double counting you
got uh F ofx Union Y and uh you want to
look at that entire set the union and
then look at the flow from any member in
X Union y to any member in Z and uh you
can do that by breaking it up provided
you're careful about double counting and
the fact that the the two sets X and Y
do not have an intersection or they have
have a null intersection implies that
you're okay with the right hand side all
right so you might be going why are we
doing this right well here's uh a good
reason to like implicit set
notation uh you can you can prove some
interesting
theorems in a in a very elegant
way using this
notation so let's do one example of that
you'll probably see others in section
so one of the things that we'd like to
do
is prove a pretty important theorem
which I think all of you probably can of
assume in your heads uh in given all of
the properties of flow networks that we
have and it's a very simple theorem that
simply
says um I have the law of conservation
that is applied on all of these
intermediate vertices
and I got a a bunch of uh Commodities I
got I got a flow going out of s right so
where can this flow go where does this
flow end
up it ends up at at the sink at T right
so so so so the point is that if you
have all of these properties that we
have up
here uh you're going to uh be able to
show and you want to show this you want
to prove this that um the value of a
flow uh which is defined as what gets
pushed out from the source is exactly
what goes into the sync right if that's
not the case there's been a violation of
some property perhaps a capacity
constraint or perhaps uh more likely a
conservation constraint okay so so the
theorem that we to prove is simply that
f is f of V comma T right that's the
theorem and and there's a lot going on
here so it's worth spending 30 seconds
looking at what exactly this means what
I have here is that if you just look at
this and that I'm saying that f is what
gets pushed out of uh of the source okay
and now what I'm saying here is that f
the value is exactly what gets pushed in
to the sync okay so this is what I have
to prove right and I should be able to
prove that by invoking my laws right
that's it I mean that's my aaic system I
got those laws I got a uh I got a
definition of a of a flow that may not
necessarily be the max flow it might be
something much less than the max flow it
might be the max flow regardless what
gets out of the source has to get into
the sync right so how are we going to do
that and the implicit summation notation
is going to give you essentially a three
or four line proof which is very
intuitive right so let's let's do that
and maybe you can help
me so we're going to start with what we
know right so that's the
proof f
equals F of s comma V right so that's
what we got that's the definition of
cardinality of f or or value of f okay
um what I'm going to do is
I I'm going to say uh this is the same
as I'll give you the first step and then
let's see whether you can help me with
the the remaining is the same as F of V
minus S capital V right so uh if you
have if you're having trouble
differentiating between my cap v's and
small V's a holler I'm trying to write
them as big as possible yeah you may put
little hats on let put little hats on
them yes I will put little hats on them
I'll put little frisbees on them if I
could
but I like frisbees much better than
hats all right that's good that's that's
good to do um so uh so yeah so so I
think hopefully I'll keep doing this and
uh it won't be confusing um so what I've
done here is invoke
essentially this except it's not exactly
that uh in in this in the sense that
it's written a little bit differently
but if you see what's going on here uh
what I've done is U uh is look at uh
this s and uh I've said you know think
of this S as being um cap V uh minus uh
cap V minus s right so that gives you s
and those are clearly disjoint right
those are clearly disjoint sets
uh that is this one and this one are
disjoint sets that's that's what I mean
to say I mean these two aren't disjoint
but this and that are disjoint and
that's what you need in order to invoke
uh the little U property that you have
here and so uh that all makes sense you
see why I did that okay um what can I
say about uh either of these two
quantities can I say something about
either of these two
quantities yeah
F of V Tov is zero that's exactly right
F of V Tov is zero there you
go so this is
simply um I'm going to uh invert that
I'm going to write this as F of
V
hat minus
s okay I've just flipped this I have a
negative sign here but I've flipped that
and uh symmetry tells me I can do that
right
um all right so so I'm up to this point
here um now what I'm going to do is uh
I'm going to do F of v t and the reason
I want to do this is because this is
where I want to get at right eventually
I want to show something that
corresponds to F of cap V uh uh T right
so uh and and what I have here is uh VT
but now I could do plus F of
v v minus cap - s minus t
right so what I've done here is taken
vus s and I pulled out T from it
remember T is part of cap V cap V
contains all of the vertices so I've
pulled out T from it but that implies
that I have to do vus s minus t over
here and again dis join right so so it's
all
good uh what can I say about uh about
this yeah zero of flow conservation it's
zero because of flow conservation that's
exactly right we didn't quite write it
that way but if you look at uh what the
implicit summation notation would mean
for that uh you look at it and you say
um maybe the
one more step would be uh let me think
about this as being F of
v t it become more obvious if I write it
this way F of V I'm putting a minus in
here V minus s minus
t and cap V
again right so all I've done here is
flip these two skew symmetry allows me
to do that and now look at what I have
here I'm talking about a flow uh that
corresponds to some uh for any uh vertex
I I pick and it's not an S vertex it's
not a t vertex so it's an intermediate
vertex and if I look at an intermediate
vertex and look at the the flow uh that
goes out to all vertices uh conservation
says that has to be zero right so that's
exactly what this says uh uh for any U
that is in this uh there neither s nor T
but in V uh the sum has to be zero so
this is zero and we're
done
right oh you frisbee who was that
ah so that's the power of uh implicit
summation notation right so we uh could
invoke uh these different properties it
was fairly straightforward your first
example of this you'll probably see a
few more all right um any questions so
far
okay so uh as you can see I as I
promised or threatened at the beginning
but followed through on my threat uh we
are have a lot of notation a lot of
baggage here before we get to algorithms
right but we're slowly getting there um
the next major concept is the concept of
cuts right so a a cut you think of a cut
as being a well a cut through paper you
know a cut through the air whatever it
turns out the notion of a cut in a
network is more General than that right
a cut is basically a partition um a cut
is a partition of nodes and a partition
means that you can't have a node in both
sides right so a cut is going to give
you two disjoint uh components at at the
end of it but the cut doesn't have to be
something contiguous it doesn't have to
be you know line through the network and
everything to the left of the line is uh
it's in one half of the cut and
everything on the right of the line is
in a different half of the cut uh I can
just break up these nodes uh into two
disjoint parts and the only constraint
that I'm going to ask for is that uh is
that s which is the source is on one
side of the cut and T which is the sink
is another side of the cut okay that's
it uh and given that uh I'm going to say
interesting things really interesting
things about the flow uh through a cut
okay and so let's do that let's define a
cut
so a cut
is
St of a flow
Network
G is a
partition of
v such that small s belongs to cap
s and small T belongs to cap t
right I don't know do you want hats on
the T
too I'll just write them L
large if a
flow on
G if f is a flow on
G then the flow across the cut
is f s
t
Okay um so again implicit summation
notation here uh the flow across the cut
is as the sum of the flows uh
corresponding to each pair of vertices
such that the source vertex is part of
capital S and the destination vertex is
part of capital T all right that's it
I'm just going to add them all up right
that's the flow across the
cut
um so what I can do now is just talk
about let's just go up here back to
this um and I'm going
to look at uh exactly what I have here
is that right not not exactly I'm going
to change this a little bit because
I I want to make sure I don't have to
add up
numbers and do that
incorrectly so I need a
one yep that's all I need to do to
change
it so I'm going to change our example
here not the topology of the
example
but the actual numbers and you'll need
to verify
that what I have here satisfies our flow
Network
properties
and uh there's one
more okay so I think I'm good all right
so uh this is uh going to be an
example um of a cut I haven't defined
the cut yet
let's get rid of that uh holler if you
think there's something wrong with this
flow right I think I got it right it
satisfies uh capacity constraints it
satisfies flow conservation constraints
right the flow that is going into T is
four this happens to be a Max flow
doesn't really matter right so what
we're going to talk about with respect
to Cuts doesn't require the flow to be
maximum keep that in mind um what do I
mean by uh the flow across the cut via
an example um I'm going to Simply
say
that the Shaded
nodes two of them are part of capital S
Okay so
so as you can see I just arbitrarily
picked a couple of nodes and they're not
necessarily something that can be easily
partitioned using a actual cut line a
physical cut line I just picked that
that one over there and the one over
here with s and so I I can
now look at
this and I can uh compute numerically
for this example it's worth doing at
least once what the flow across this
particular Cut Is defined by the
particular choice of cap s and cap
T okay and and that's what we're going
to
do
so F of cap s
t
is I'm going to have to look at pairs of
nodes such that I got a shaded node on
the left hand side and and non-shaded
node on the right hand side and I'm
going to have to go through all of the
the the the combinations right so um if
I look at this I can I can first knock
off uh this one and that one and that
one let
me actually put it put in let's call
this a
b and c here and we can call that uh d
right so we have S and D as being part
of the cut in terms of S capital S and
the other ones are are in cap
T um and so what I have is I could I
could do sa a and SB so I got 2 +
2 right and this would correspond to sa
and
SB so those are going out right so far
so good um and then um I'm going to
write on a bunch of numbers here min-2 +
1 -1 +
2 okay and uh the minus two wherever
Theus two come
from well an an a d for example is a is
a minus two right because D is part of
it would be da so uh an A D is U has a
flow of two correct and so DA has a flow
of minus two right and da is part of
what I have here because D is part of
capital S and a is part of capital T you
guys see that so it's this is not
trivial so pay attention
um so this would be uh for example uh
the minus two would correspond to uh uh
to a comma D comma a uh that's what I
need here and uh I could also have uh
what do I have here I have uh C
something is going into D so CD is one
so DC is minus one right make sense D DC
is minus one what about the plus one
where do I get a plus one from
DB is going out that's exactly right
DB and the plus two uh it would be D DT
right
so um and so you have to do the
enumeration this it's worthwhile doing
once and then it gets kind of boring uh
we won't do it again but you have to
realize that you have to absolutely look
at every
pair of vertices and you have to use Q
Symmetry and ensure that even though
there's uh actually no Edge going out if
there's an edge coming in you got to
count that and you that's going to get
Negative whatever it's coming in you got
to you got to subtract okay so it's not
that complicated yeah go ahead we not
consider I'm sorry consider um so when
you don't have so the the the beauty of
this is that uh when you don't have a
particular Edge from uh s to C you can
use Q symmetry to argue that SC C and CS
cancel out each other all right so so
that's the good part right and thanks
for asking the question right that's
that's a good question right here you
go so I you can you can do that by just
looking at the edges and you can you can
add up the numbers all right um and so
uh I don't think this is going to be
absolutely crucial uh to uh understand
the rest of the the the lecture I keep
this in mind that there's a a process by
which you define
the uh the value of a cut uh and we're
going to get back to this when we prove
the max flow Min cut theorem next time
but at this point I want to say
something actually much more
straightforward uh which is going to be
important uh when we uh look at uh
residual networks which is the last
concept uh that we need to get at before
we get to an LM and uh that is
simply that the the capacity of a
cut and the relationship between the
capacity of the cut and U the uh the
flow of a cut so the capacity of a cut
is C of capital S capital
t uh whoops I don't draw that properly
uh Open brackets capital S capital T and
we can do it exactly the same way except
that this is a lot simpler because you
only look at um
edges uh that uh and you only have
positive quantities so in this case
you'll simply say it's 3 + 2
corresponding to uh uh what I what did I
have here I had D comma a s comma A and
S comma
B and then uh the capacity is
U you you you you you only need to look
at U uh edges that go from a node in s
to a node in capital T and so those are
1 +
3 um and this simply would be uh the one
would be D comma
B and the three is u d comma T right so
you don't care about the other flows
this is not about flows this is simply
about capacity right so this adds up to
adds up to nine
okay um and
so uh we have at this point uh a def
we've defined the flow through a cut and
we know the capacity of a cut okay um
it's more or less obvious though it you
could suddenly prove a theorem which you
know is going to take a couple of lines
to say that uh the value
of
any
flow
um is
bounded
by the
capacity of any cut and sorry I lied
it's not a it's not a
trivial proof and there's actually
something profound going on here uh and
so I'll have to explain exactly what
this means and then we'll uh take a a
look at how we could prove something
like this so what's cool about this um
is that uh you're saying that it's the
value of any flow is bounded by the
capacity of uh of any cut okay and so
that's an upper bound on the maximum
flow value right so I'm saying you know
there's all these cuts that are possible
in the Network and I'm making a
statement about uh uh what the maximum
flow can be based on the values
corresponding to the capacities of of of
any cut right so uh why is that the case
well we're not going to be able to prove
that uh uh uh fully uh today we going to
that's the max flow Minard theorem but
you'll you can certainly get a sense of
it uh by
looking at as a different
characterization of the flow value so
I'm going to give you one half of the
proof at least and intuition about the
other half and we'll finish it next
time um but here's another
characterization of the flow value
okay so our LMA here which is going to
lead us to this statement is that
for any
flow
f and any
Cut
St we have
really
powerful dilemma maybe we should call it
a theorem but it essentially says look
it doesn't matter what cut you choose
right you got a flow on the
network and uh when you look at the the
the flow on the network it's going to
equal the flow across the cut and the
only reason for this is simply because
you got the source on one side of the
cut and you got the sync on the other
side of the cut that's it that's that's
the only thing that you need right you
dump these vertices into two bins you
know dump The Source on the left and
dump the source sync excuse me on the
right and you compute the flow the way
we've defined it that's the flow it
doesn't matter how you partition these
vertices as long as you got the source
on the left and the sync on the right
okay and so we can prove this using
implicit summation
notation we'll do
that and that'll give you a a really
good sense of why this statement is true
because we know that for any given cut
the flow of the of that cut is bounded
by the capacity of that cut right we
know that um but to show
this here's here's how we can show that
F of s
t is f of s
v minus f of
ss okay so I I'm playing around just
like I did before i' taken the cap T I
know that s Union T is Cap V right I'm
going this is a partition so I know that
s Union T is Cap V so I can put a v here
and an S here right and that's the
subtraction over there of course right
so put that up here and finish this
couple more lines
and uh what can I say about uh either of
these something I I could say something
about one of these
terms yeah the one on the right is
zero so call this F of
SV right and now I'm going to break it
up again make it small s big
V plus F of cap s minus
s cap V so broken uh this up into small
s which is just joined from cap s minus
s
clearly
um
and uh what can I say about this this is
a
little more subtle than perhaps the
previous question uh what can I say
about that quantity I mean the answer is
not subtle but uh yeah go ahead that
isal to zero and why because as the cap
s doesn't contain T ah beautiful that's
right so that's what I wanted so this
does not contain
T and so now you can use flow
conservation right and that's that's the
important thing uh you can uh um you can
use flow conservation because this does
not contain T and and then it clearly
does not contain small s because I just
took it out of it right so so that goes
to zero and voila that's simply F of SV
which we know is uh uh is is is f right
we just we proved that uh we did our
first implicit summation proof was uh
showing that U uh well this is the
definition excuse me so we showed that
uh we did it for for uh for the sync uh
but this is simply the definition
um of of the flow value right so this is
beautiful I mean it's like fantastic
right why aren't people
excited because I put people to sleep
before in the hour before right but this
is absolutely fantastic because this
says that I have ways of uh uh of
figuring out what the maximum flow of
the network would be uh by making
arbitary cuts through this network and
looking for capacities of these Cuts
right because I know that the capacity
of any cut and now you see why Min cut
is interesting but you know that the
capacity of any cut is going to bound
the flow of the network right because
the flow through a cut is the flow
through the network so if I go through
and look at the Min cut uh corresponding
to the minimum capacity associated with
the flow Network that's going to point
me to my Max flow right because that's
going to be a bound on an upper bound on
the on the max flow right and so now you
see why the Min not the Min flow sorry
the Min Cut Max flow theorem is is is an
interesting one but it it it relates and
this is the beginning of that
relationship we're not quite done to
prove it but the beginning of the
relationship is that you can look at any
cut and you can look at the flow through
the cut as being the flow through the
network and then you use the second part
of it which is the capacity bounding of
course in a very simple way because of
edge capacities the flow through the cut
and you can put those two things
together all right we still don't quite
know how to find these Cuts right so we
don't quite know how to find these cuts
and that's the last thing that we're
going to do today give you a sense of
how we're going to find these mint Cuts
so we can find the max flow all
right cool so the one last
notion uh that we have here that is
going to allow us to go into the
algorithm domain as opposed to the
analysis domain right we all all we've
done so far is analysis analysis
analysis is the notion of a residual
Network okay and a residual Network as
its name implies is something that has
residual capacities it's the network
that points you to places where you can
increase the flow because there's
capacity left there's your flow is less
than the edge capacity it's a local
notion so it's easy to
compute there's a capacity of three on
this Edge there's a flow of two the
residual capacity is one right 3 minus 2
um and so the residual
Network um is GF
VF right so so the actual network is
gve and the vertices are going to be the
same the graph is obviously different
but the edges are going to be different
there's going to be a different uh set
of edges in the residual Network as
opposed to the flow Network
okay and
um
uh you have
strictly positive that means greater
than zero strictly greater than zero
residual capacities
right so CF
UV equals CU UV minus F
UV and that's strictly greater than zero
I'm going to put an edge in there if
there is a residual capacity zero
doesn't mean there's any residual
capacity um
edges in
EF admit
more
flow
okay um and one last
thing
if V does not belong to e so we talking
about uh the original Network here e
means the original Network then we know
that c of Vu equals zero that was that
definition if you don't have that edge
the capacity is
zero
but
I we talking now about F which is a flow
which doesn't necessarily
require that there be an edge and we're
simply going to
use uh our skew symmetry relationship
and you'll see that uh this may not be
completely clear as to why I wrote this
at this moment but as I draw the
residual Network you'll see why that is
important it's going to be the case that
we're going to have extra edges in the
residual Network that don't exist in the
original Network because of that last
line there right so let me clear that up
so we're going to
draw a a a residual network uh for uh
I'm going to change that yet again uh
but we're going to draw the residual
Network
for our example up there topology is
going to stay the same numbers are going
to to change because I want something
slightly more interesting than uh what
we have there so I'm going to take this
out uh
to
one one
[Music]
two go back to what it was before I
think
one all right good so um I want a one
over here
uh I want a a one over
here uh a two over here and keep
checking to make sure I'm
not messing up here in terms of flow
constraints but that's pretty much all I
got okay um so the flow here uh and the
the the s and t don't particularly
matter the max flow is four the flow
that you see up there there is three
this is what we had right up at the
beginning all right so what I want to do
now is I give you what the residual
Network is for this particular flow
remember that the residual network is
defined based on a flow that's why you
have G of f g subscript f f is a flow so
he going to have a different residual
network if the flow is different so the
original example that I had would have a
different residual Network this one is
going to have the one I'm going to draw
all right so the residual Network has
the same set of vertices so I can go
ahead and
draw uh these
vertices I'll just Mark T and S over
here those are exactly the same as
before and this is
GF okay that's our residual Network and
the edges are going to be different all
I have to do is look it up look up there
and say look I'm going to have a
residual capacity of
two uh let me use a different color
since I have
them uh corresponding to that edge from
s to a because I clearly have a capacity
of three and I only have a flow of one
right so that's all the is to it now the
interesting thing is that I'm because of
this line over here I'm actually going
to
Define an edge in
EF in GF or EF that corresponds to this
Edge that didn't exist in E because I
can shrink the flow from 1 to zero and
that essentially says that that
shrinkage is represented in the residual
Network by an edge that goes from this
node a up there to S right and that is
going to have a residual
capacity of U of one right so that's it
that's the only extra thing that you
have to remember when you draw the
residual Network you not only can
increase the flow you can also shrink it
you have to represent the shrinkage of
the Flow by an edge in the residual
Network and you obviously represent the
increase of the Flow by an edge in the
residual Network and now you see why
this all going to make sense remember
way back um eons ago only an hour ago
but uh uh we we had this example where
uh we had to shrink the flow in a
particular uh Edge in order to get the
overall flow to increase right the
residual network is going to point us in
the direction of potentially those edges
whose flow has to shrink but they're
going to be
represented in in effect as these
reverse edges with positive numbers
associated with them so there's a one
here is positive because it goes from
this node call it a back to S and if I
if I if I if I shrink this uh um uh from
one to zero that is in effect taking
what I have up here and making this one
a zero okay that's the way you want to
think about this so that's pretty much
it um I can draw out the rest of this
and it should all make sense um I have
an edge like
that so there's not going to be a a
there's the edges that are at capacity
up there aren't going to show up here
the edges that are not at capacity end
up with two edges down below if they
have
a flow that is nonzero right if if you
have a zero flow up there you're only
going to get one
Edge assuming that obviously you'll get
one Edge because the capacity is non
zero but the ones that are not quite at
capacity end up with two edges right
think of that as being the simple rule
right and make sure that I'm following
this rule good uh exercise is to check
for bugs lectur bugs best way of
understanding the material
and okay so that's my residual Network
um and let me just point I'll I'll put
in some numbers uh or maybe you can tell
me some of what some of these numbers
are what is this
number
two right now this is a little more
tricky um take a look at the the the
number that goes up versus the number
that comes down what is this number goes
up uh that's two because I can go from
one to three and this number would be
beautiful all right you guys got it did
my
job all right so that's our residual
Network for this particular flow right
so mechanical way of computing it uh and
you should be able to do
that um
now what exactly can we do with this
residual Network um it turns out that uh
the algorithm now can be described in a
couple of sentences right our
essentially our Ford Fulkerson algorithm
I'm not going to bother writing this out
because I'm going to have to prove the
max flow mincut theorem next time and
we're going to talk about the Ford
ferson algorithm and issues with it next
time but I'm going to show you how the
Ford ferson algorith works on this
particular example and it's only going
to have one step all right so it's going
to converge in one step so it's going to
be relatively easy right but the bottom
line is the the Ford Fulkerson algorithm
is going to look for um augmenting
paths
right in
GF augmenting paths are defined in the
residual Network what is an augmenting
path you ask well an augmenting path is
simply a
path from s in GF to T in GF okay that's
it that's that's all the rest to it if
you can find a path you could use depth
first search you could use bread first
search you could use whatever you wanted
you find the path from s to T okay if
you find such a path if this path
exists it means that the flow is not
maximum okay if no path exists the flow
is maximum and you're done if such a
path exists you will be able to increase
the flow in this case because we have
integral quantities by at least one okay
and you will be able to increase the
Flow by one and not only that the
augmenting path is going to tell you
exactly what to do with respect to what
edges to change you sometimes subtract
the flow from sometimes increase right
so the augmenting path is going to take
care of it but we have flipped it so
everything is positive you know life is
great positive numbers you just look at
s to T and tell me give me any path from
s to T here in uh in the uh in the
residual Network so let me let me just
call them a a
b a d and c and we don't care about
partitions or cut at this point that's
required for proofs but give me a path
from s to
T yeah go ahead
s all right a little bit more slowly S2
a okay and
then A to B
beautiful B to
C and C to T wonderful and um I I have a
a a a capacity a residual Capac of two
here I have a residual capacity of one
here one here and one here and so um the
the value of this augmenting path um is
is one right it's not two uh because the
minimum value is what I can push through
the network and I just need to take the
Min of all of the residual capacities
corresponding to the edges that I
traversed that correspond to this
particular path and that Min value of
2111 is one right so what this means is
I've discovered an augmenting path of uh
residual capacity one now I can go back
to this thing over here and these edges
are going to point me in some cases to
complementary edges in some cases to the
direct edges that had going to have to
have their flows changed either
increased or decreased to increase the
flow in the original Network so you're
guaranteed now that F which caused this
residual Network to have an augmenting
path in it was not maximum you're
guaranteed that because you found this
path okay so what happens here well you
go back up and you say I remember I'm
going to increment by plus one because
that's the residual capacity so I'm
going to go up here and I have S to a
you need to you you'll need to help me
out again so I'm going to make this two
right because I need to add a one to it
what happens here this is the key
step subtract and make this a zero right
we're not quite done what's what's
next I have B to C right right you're
still on the hook B to C becomes three
right and then lastly this becomes two
okay and at this point if you create a
residual Network for this new flow you
will not be able to find a path in that
residual network from s to T and you
know you're done right so all of this uh
works we haven't quite shown that it
works because we haven't done enough of
the proofs but you have a sense as to
why this works you could probably code
this up it it would all work couple of
issues and applications see you next
time